[Alison] This week…
Let's go in the zone.
…we're baking biscuits.
It's such a tight one.
[Alison] With a signature…
Far too many things happening.
…that sends everyone into a whirl.
[Hazel] Oh, my God.
[Alison] A mint-topped technical.
-You haven't got a clue, have you?
-No.
[Alison] And the most
theatrical showstopper…
-[gasps] Ah!
-…ever staged.
That's one of the best things
I've ever seen in the tent.
[Alison] Whose biscuits will be cracking?
If you could eliminate one person…
…and whose bake…
I'm just going to eliminate you.
If you could…
…is about to crumble?
-[thud]
-[gasps]
We're dropping like bloody flies.
[John] We got a medic?
[opening theme music playing]
[Noel] For the first time ever,
we still have a full batch of bakers
for Biscuit Week…
Let's see what today brings.
-…as Jeff has returned.
-Here we go again.
[Jeff] I'm a little under the weather,
but it's great to be back
and have another go.
-Good luck, everybody.
-Yeah, good luck.
[John] Biscuit Week is not my favourite.
I could literally go
from the top to the bottom.
I'm really just hoping for a calm week.
Touch wood.
[Mike] I know how to eat a biscuit,
just maybe not make them.
[laughs] Please help me.
Two people might be leaving,
so I'm really scared. [laughs]
I'm ready. I'm ready for everything.
Hello, bakers. Welcome back to the tent.
You won't believe it. It's Biscuit Week.
-Crumbs.
-[laughs]
For your signature challenge,
the lovely judges would like you to make
12 Viennese sandwich biscuits.
Your biscuits can be any shape
and the flavours and the fillings
are entirely up to you.
-[Noel] You have two hours.
-On your marks.
-Get set.
-Bake!
[bright classical music playing]
-Who doesn't like a Viennese biscuit?
-They melt in your mouth. Lovely.
I'd never heard of a Viennese whirl
till I came to Britain.
A Viennese biscuit is all about
that buttery coating on the outside,
beautifully crumbly
and rich on the inside,
and, of course,
the sandwich filling must be unctuous too.
Viennese biscuits sound
terribly easy to make,
but it's really important to get
the texture right so that you can pipe it.
If the butter gets too soft,
the biscuits won't hold
their definition in the oven
because they'll begin to melt.
If you overbake them,
it makes the coating on the outside
thick and difficult to eat.
Underbake it,
literally, it falls apart in your mouth.
[Prue] I bet some of these bakers
will come up with flavours
we would never dream of putting together.
And, of course, I want them
to taste like heaven.
-[birds chirping]
-[Paul] Hello, John.
-Good morning.
-Hello.
-You okay?
-So tell us about your signature.
I am making
an Irish coffee Viennese biscuit
with a Irish cream ganache
with a coffee praline centre.
-[Paul] Wow.
-[Prue] I like the idea.
-How does it feel being Star Baker?
-The pressure's on now.
[Alison] John and his cockerpoo, Stanley,
live a few doors
from his dad, Kevin, and mum, Linda…
-All right, Stan?
-Good boy.
…who still does his washing
in return for some home baking.
Washing. I've baked a loaf of bread.
Next time, thank you,
we'll have a nice cake.
[Alison] He's hoping
his Irish coffee Viennese whirls
will help him retain the Star Baker crown.
Heard of the curse of the Star Baker?
Why would you do this to me?
Yes, I'll probably go home today.
No. No, I'm not…
-You're not going today. Tomorrow.
-Tomorrow maybe.
He will leave a Star Baker,
know what I mean?
[Noel] In need of a pick-me-up
after Cake Week,
Jeff is also hitting the caffeine.
These are coffee and hazelnut.
Yeah, I drink a lot of coffee.
You don't drink a lot of tea in the Bronx.
[Noel] 67-year-old Jeff tries to stay
in shape at his local pool,
his local gym…
-[tree cutter whirring]
-…and his back garden.
[Jeff] Timber.
[Alison] He's packed out
his dark chocolate-dipped whirls
with a strong coffee American buttercream.
-How are ya?
-Very well, thank you.
-Feeling better?
-Better today.
-I was a bit rough the other day.
-Do you make this at home?
Yeah, I turned all my family
into coffee addicts.
-You guys like tea here.
-Tea's nothing compared to coffee.
In the States, they say,
if you ask for tea,
-"Oh, you don't feel so well?"
-[laughs]
It's not something you drink.
-"You okay?" [laughs]
-Yeah. "You okay?"
-"Shall I get a doctor?"
-That's it. Yeah.
I also don't drink tea,
so I don't have a biscuit and tea.
I'm making orange and pistachio
Viennese whirls,
and everyone at my house was like,
"What are these?"
[Noel] Illiyin road tests
her new recipes at family gatherings.
[Illiyin] Mmm.
[Noel] And on the school run.
It's all finished. There's no more.
[Noel] The family made short work
of her Viennese whirls
filled with pistachio cream
and a fresh orange gel.
[Illiyin] I'm gonna keep the orange sharp,
so that it kind of goes, "Ooh! Hello!"
That's what I like.
It's how I like to sort of
crop up on people, "Hello!"
[Alison] Viennese biscuit dough
is uniquely fickle.
I was till midnight practising.
[Alison] The dough needs to be
just soft enough to pipe.
Gonna be a lot of whipping time
for me today.
[Noel] But whipped too soft…
Ah.
…they'll lose their piped shape
in the heat of the oven.
-What are you doing?
-In Dutch, you call this a rubbing dough.
You rub the butter together
on your work surface with the sugar
so it becomes fluffy.
When I do it like this,
the texture of it is nicer.
[Noel] Dutch-born Christiaan
tries to bake with ingredients
from the garden he's planted
with his partner Nick.
-Lovely. Innit?
-Very nice.
[Noel] His hand-mixed tarragon biscuits
will be filled
with a blueberry and lavender jam.
Tarragon and the lavender,
I grow them in a vegtrug at home.
I can't say that I'm convinced
the flavours will work,
but I'm keen to try.
Okay, well, that's a good thing.
I like that.
[Alison] Christiaan's not the only baker
who's raided the garden.
I've got the two separate flavours,
rhubarb and custard.
I dehydrated my own rhubarb
and then ground it down to a dust.
[Alison] Georgie works in Carmarthenshire,
at the local hospital's
special care baby unit.
Big bubble.
[Alison] She'll inject dehydrated rhubarb
into one of her biscuit doughs
and add custard powder to the other
for a biscuit that's as unique as she is.
-[Noel] When'd you get your first tattoo?
-Bang on 18.
-Soon as I was legal, straight there.
-Bet your parents were pleased.
-They might not know.
-They might--
-No.
-They do now.
-Oh, my God.
-[Noel laughing]
I'm gonna go straight on the piping.
I need to concentrate.
[Noel] The judges have demanded
12 identical Viennese sandwiches…
[Hazel] Oh, my God.
…made from 24 flawlessly piped biscuits.
You need arms like Arnold Schwarzenegger,
which I'm not far off.
Can you see me… I'm literally shaking.
-[Alison] But some of the bakers…
-Oh, ay, ay, ay, ay. This is so painful.
…are going beyond piping identical whirls.
What's happening here? Are these Ewoks?
-They look like little doggies.
-They are.
-Are they doggies?
-Yeah! I'm so pleased.
-[Noel] Is it your dog?
-Yes.
-What's he called?
-Karolko.
-KaroKo?
-Kar-roll-ko.
-Karolo… I can't roll my R's.
-[laughs]
[Noel] Slovakian-born Nelly
began baking at 14
with a batch of gingerbread men.
She's starting her sons,
Samir and Idris, a little younger.
-[Nelly] Daddy gonna eat it.
-No, I'm eating.
[Alison] Filled with a hazelnut
chocolate ganache and raspberry jam,
her piped faces should resemble
her dog from back home.
-[Noel] Where are you from again?
-You forgot?
I am your love of your life
and you forgot where I'm from?
Unbelievable. This is a disaster.
Lithuania, no?
I'm joking… I'm joking.
I'm joking. [laughs]
[Sumayah] I'm doing swans.
Though I'm scared of swans,
but I think they look cool.
Let's put them in the oven.
[Alison] As well as baking,
Sumayah feeds her creative urge
with photography,
making her own clothes
and designing jewellery.
Oh, my God, the meringues.
I just didn't take them out of the oven.
[Noel] Her swans will be filled
with a creative combination
of a blackberry and rosemary jam
with a goat's cheese
and honey buttercream.
But the heads snap really easily,
so I need to make quite a few extra ones.
Or we'll have headless swans.
Freezer!
-[John] Do you not chill them first?
-No. No, I didn't.
-I always chill mine for half an hour.
-Do you?
Oh, I will then.
Anyway, never mind. It's gotta go in.
[Mike] They're in the freezer chilling.
If it goes into the oven too warm,
it'll just spread.
-Oh, no, no. Uh! Uh-uh.
-Write that down.
That's advice.
Hasn't got 'em in the oven yet.
-I knew that. It's fine.
-[Alison] Did you?
[Noel] When he isn't working
on the family farm…
-[cows mooing]
-Hello.
…Mike treads the boards
at his local theatre group.
You mustn't do that in the pool.
[Alison] He's hoping for rave reviews
for his raspberry jam
and buttercream-filled Viennese whirls
made with malted biscuit.
[Mike] The malted barley comes our farm,
so this gives that nice,
earthy flavour to the biscuit.
-[Paul] I like the flavours.
-Flavours sound really great.
If you've got any trouble,
just give Prue a shout.
If you could give me some more tips, Prue,
that'd be great. [chuckles]
[Noel] Bakers, you are halfway through.
How long does it take to bake a biscuit?
Four minutes?
So they've had a bit of time to chill now,
so I'm hoping they hold their shape
in the oven.
So now let's pray. Please don't melt.
Bismillah.
-We're in bosh.
-[timer beeping]
[Noel] The bakers now have
a narrow window…
Far too many things happening at once.
…to prepare the fillings that will
sandwich their Viennese biscuits.
[John] So this is just the Irish cream,
white chocolate ganache.
So I just tasted it
and I wanted more Irish cream
in there for Prue's tastes.
[Illiyin] I absolutely love pistachio.
If you're not careful,
it can get lost in the orange.
But I feel like pistachio's king.
It'll be fine.
What's life if you don't take chances?
[Alison] And Illiyin's not the only one
taking a chance with fillings.
[Christiaan] I'm making
the blueberry and lavender jam.
I'm mixing the lavender
and the sugar together.
The smell of it is intense.
I like it when you get
a bit of a hit of it,
so I hope the judges do as well.
[Sumayah] So now I'm gonna start making
my goat's cheese buttercream.
I hate goat's cheese.
It's like a really gamey flavour
that I absolutely hate.
I trust my parents,
'cause they tasted it and they liked it,
so I was like, "Okay."
I'd rub myself in this stuff.
[Noel] Andy's making a filling
he actually likes.
I done a stint in Kosovo with the army
with the American sector.
Them ration packs had
little peanut butters and jelly.
Oh, I didn't look back.
-I don't like peanut butter.
-Don't ya?
-Do you like peanut butter?
-Not a lot.
[Alison] Andy joined the army at 17
and served in the Balkan War
with the Princess of Wales's
Royal Regiment.
But whilst he borrowed
his flavour combination
from the US soldiers he served with,
it seems the Americans
have borrowed something in return.
-He's got the same cap on as you.
-I know.
-It's on backwards.
-He's gone green as well.
I reckon he's gone in my room,
looked at my clobber,
and he's gone, "I'm gonna jack that."
And he's jacked my style.
He's actually come as you.
Can't wait till he comes as me
in this outfit.
[both laugh]
This is now stiff peaks.
[Noel] The inspiration for Dylan's
fillings is a lot closer to home.
Yeah.
When we were kids,
my mum set up a tent in our garden
and me, my brother and my sister
went out and ate Viennese biscuits.
[Noel] Since he was a boy,
Dylan's grandmother, Prafulla,
has taught him the recipes
for the family's favourite treats.
Very clever boy.
[Dylan snickers]
[Noel] He's developed a unique method
for giving his Viennese fingers' filling
a campfire flavour.
I'm gonna light it on fire.
I'm gonna toast the meringue
so it's like toasted marshmallowy taste.
Whoo.
[Alison] Whilst Dylan aims
for the smoky taste of a s'more,
Gill's taking another American classic
even further.
I'm terrible. If I go out for a meal,
I want all the puddings.
And I have a very accommodating husband
who'll pick another one that I want
and we'll share.
So this came from having a key lime pie
and a passionfruit pavlova
on the same plate.
[bell tolling]
[Alison] In Lancashire,
three generations of Gill's family
have rung the bells at her local church.
Tricky part's when your rope breaks.
That's happened.
[Noel] She's hoping her lime curd
and passionfruit buttercream combination
rings true with the judges.
Tell me about bell ringing.
Is it true it can lift you up?
Oh, God, yeah.
There's a rope hole about that big,
which I will not fit through.
If I go up,
you get a nasty bump on the head.
[Alison] Fair enough.
What's more stressful,
bell ringing or this?
This.
[Noel] Forty-five minutes remaining.
Yeah, they're done.
All in shape. I'm happy.
[Georgie] Oh, God.
[Noel] Georgie's custard biscuits seem
to have gone better than the rhubarb.
It's just the colour they come out,
it's really weird.
It's the rhubarb powder. Really weird.
[Alison] And she's not
the only one struggling.
Oh, my God, they've just gone flat.
Never ever done that before.
[Alison] Family trips to the local beach
always feature tea
and a few of Hazel's biscuits.
-[woman] Put your bikini on.
-[laughs]
[Alison] But her latest batch
of coffee and hazelnut Viennese whirls
aren't exactly beach-ready.
I put all my butter in there. Two packs.
I only needed 250. I put 500 grams in.
-That's why it's not holding its shape.
-I know.
[John] Start again.
'Cause it'll never work.
-[exhales] No. Oh.
-Ever.
I need some butter.
[Gill] Yay, they're just golden
around the edges.
I will take that as a win.
Just gonna throw that lot.
I'm just throwing them,
not even gonna try.
They've lost a little bit shape,
but what can I do?
[mixer whirring]
[Noel] Whilst Hazel starts
her biscuit dough again…
Biscuits out.
…she's not the only one
not quite done with the oven.
These are my swan heads.
These are a lot quicker to bake
because they're really thin.
[John] You okay?
[Hazel] This is a nightmare.
How long have we got?
-Bakers, you have half an hour left.
-I'm just gonna put them straight in.
[Illiyin] Quite excited for them.
-[John] Happy.
-I think they're looking all right.
But then you look around me,
and other people's have more detail.
[Dylan] Gonna dip half of it in chocolate.
They look good.
[Sumayah] My goat's cheese buttercream.
The cheese I'm using
is a really, really mild one,
so it is palatable, slightly.
[Christiaan] I put a tablespoon and a half
of lavender in the jam.
[Dylan] Hazelnut praline
adds to the toasty flavours.
A touch of orange gel. Zesty.
[Andy] Smooth. Peanut butter and jam,
it's like heaven.
Like Jeff, nice and smooth.
[Jeff] This is coffee buttercream.
[Alison] But balancing filling to biscuit…
Hopefully Paul gonna
actually taste the raspberries.
I think I'd better take these out now.
[Alison] …is yet to be an issue for Hazel.
Have to get 'em straight in the fridge.
How long have we got?
[Noel] Ten minutes.
No one else knows that, only you.
I love that you share secrets with me.
[Noel] Shall I tell them?
-No.
-[Noel] Do you want to?
-Yeah.
-Go on, then.
Bakers, you have ten minutes left.
[all] Whoo!
I'll get my cream in my bag.
-Forget it, I'm not baking any more.
-[laughs]
-No.
-[Noel] It's easier than it looks.
-That's all there is to it.
-Simple.
-[Alison] Hold on.
-The game's up.
What is going on here?
She trying to get my job?
-Out. Go on, get out.
-They need younger--
-Younger, better looking, good at baking.
-Prettier…
I'm not happy about this.
[Hazel] I am having a mare.
[Sumayah] I'm painting my beaks and eyes.
I'm nearly done,
then I'll find a bed and go to sleep.
-[Mike] The standard is so high.
-People are getting better at baking.
-[Mike] Because of this show.
-[Noel] It's 'cause of me.
-You are a baking inspiration.
-My advice over the years.
Stuff like, "What are you doing now?"
"Decorating?" "Is that ganache?"
-Key questions.
-"Why aren't you finished?"
[Noel] Yeah.
[Hazel] Don't know why they're still soft.
[Sumayah] The buttercream's
starting to melt.
I might have played it a little simple.
Look at his, unbelievable.
And I have a dogs.
That's off the chart. Oh! I'm--
I'll get out of your way.
-One minute left.
-They've only got one minute.
-Where have you been?
-I don't know.
-Ah, injuries.
-[Hazel] It is what it is.
Just going all over. Wasn't going to.
[dramatic music playing]
Bakers, your time is up.
I've got 11.
It's gone. I haven't got one.
I'm gonna go for a nap.
See you guys later.
[Christiaan] Oh, they look so cute.
Oh, look at Dylan's. They're amazing.
It looks so cool.
After you gonna eat my biscuits,
you gonna woof, woof.
'Cause in my country they do, "How! How!"
And here they don't do "how, how."
Or it's gonna be "home, home."
[whimsical music playing]
[tense classical music playing]
[Noel] It's judgement time
for the Viennese sandwich biscuits.
-Hi, John.
-Hello.
They've got good definition.
They're very neat.
They're small, cute.
-Bit like me.
-[all chuckle]
[Paul] Let's have a look.
So it's a chocolate biscuit
with an Irish cream ganache.
Oh, God, is that good or bad?
-It's lovely.
-Thank you.
The ganache is quite sweet,
but the biscuit has a bitterness to it,
because it's coffee,
so it works really well.
I think they're slightly overdone,
so it gives you quite a dry mouth
-rather than luxurious.
-[John] Yeah.
[bright classical music playing]
[Paul] They're a bit clumsy.
You've lost definition
'cause it's gone too flat.
Let's see what they taste like.
Mmm, that is serious coffee.
-Proper New York coffee, that.
-Mmm, I love that.
[Paul] Biscuit, for me,
it's slightly underbaked.
They look pretty uniform.
-Good definition there.
-Okay.
Great flavour. I love the texture.
It's melt-in-the-mouth,
but it still has a crunch.
-Very sweet. The curd brings it back.
-[Prue] Mmm.
-Just needs a bit more curd in. Yeah.
-I think so.
[bright classical music playing]
I wouldn't have drizzled all over it.
[Mike] Got a bit too vigorous.
-With your drizzle?
-I got too vigorous with the drizzle.
And it's a really
melt-in-the-mouth biscuit.
They do crumble beautifully.
You've kept it basic in flavour,
but the subtlety is the king.
-Thank you.
[bright classical music playing]
It's clever, but not very neat.
[Prue] But you can see it's a dog
and it looks cute.
[Nelly] It's chocolate ganache
with raspberry jam.
Oh, dear. It's coming now.
-Can you feel the jam?
-Feel the jam?
-Yeah. No, taste it.
-[Paul] What, eat it? Oh.
-[all laughing]
-Do you feel it?
Pecans come through.
Chocolate comes through.
-Jam comes through.
-Oh, hallelujah.
Mmm, the biscuit dough is really good.
It's melt-in-the-mouth,
but crisp on the outside.
That's how they make it in Vienna.
I lived there seven years. It's original.
I was there recently.
Which shop did you say these were in?
In any shops, you just missed it.
You went to the posh ones.
I'm going to the normal ones.
[all laugh]
[bright classical music playing]
You managed to get
amazing definition out of it.
[Prue] It's a neat design.
And the dipping is good.
Very tender, lovely biscuit. Mmm.
[Paul] I love the praline in there
and the buttercream,
'cause it's silky smooth,
and with the Viennese biscuits
being so crumbly,
it blends beautifully together.
-That's really good, Dylan.
-[Dylan] Thank you.
-Multi-layered and delicious.
-Thank you.
[Prue] Mmm.
That must have been close to a handshake.
[both chuckle]
[bright classical music playing]
I don't think they look
tremendously appetising.
[Georgie] The rhubarb makes
the speckledy effect with the powder.
That's how they turned out.
[laughs]
With the rhubarb sharp in that biscuit,
you need the other biscuit together.
Which means you really need
to have less filling.
-Otherwise you can't get it in your mouth.
-Okay, yeah.
[bright piano music playing]
I think a mouthful of dried lavender
is not going to be pleasant.
Yeah, that's fair enough.
[Prue] But that looks really good.
I think you're quite an alchemist,
you know.
-[laughs]
-[Prue] It's really interesting.
-And it's delicious.
-Oh, thank you. [laughs]
-And I wasn't expecting that.
-No, you weren't.
The biscuit's a little bit tough.
Having said that, they taste amazing.
-Thank you very much.
-Thank you.
Alchemist.
-I'll put that in my title now.
-[laughter]
They're a little bit flat.
You've lost definition in them as well.
[biscuit clatters]
It's very odd. There's so much pistachio,
but I don't really taste it.
The sharpness coming from
the orange is delicious.
-Difficult to identify the pistachio.
-Interesting.
-[Prue] Funny.
-It's nice. It tastes good.
Although it feels more traditional biscuit
than Viennese.
[bright classical music playing]
[Prue] You've done a really good job.
-Thank you.
-There's good definition.
[Paul] All the same size and colour.
They look pretty neat.
That cherry with the peanut is delicious.
-Really good.
-[Andy] Really?
And that Viennese is one of the best
I've had for a long time.
-No way.
-Yeah.
If you go like that,
that's what you're looking for.
-Perfect.
-[Andy] Really?
I don't even like peanut butter.
-I think they're wonderful.
-Really? Aw.
-Thanks.
-I'm totally chuffed, cheers.
-That was a handshake, wasn't it?
-Cor blimey, it's hard. Hard crowd.
He probably knew
I had sweaty hands. [laughs]
[bright classical music playing]
They went wrong, so I had to start again.
-They've lost their definition.
-[Paul] Yeah.
[Prue] Let's see how it tastes.
That biscuit isn't baked.
-It isn't?
-[Prue] It's soft.
[Paul] It's quite chewy.
And there's something missing
from that recipe.
-There's no sweetness to it.
-[Prue] Yeah.
Maybe the icing sugar,
I forgot to put that in.
-Missing the sugar?
-Yeah.
-I won't say anything else about the rest.
-No, don't.
[bright classical music playing]
[Prue] Oh, I love them.
-Thank you.
-So cute.
And the definition is all there.
This one's very nervous.
-[Sumayah] There was an accident.
-[laughter]
[Sumayah] So they're
a rosemary and lemon biscuit
with a blackberry and rosemary jam
and a goat's cheese and honey buttercream.
Beautiful. The blackberry
really works with it.
The cheese gives it a nice sourness
to it as well, it balances that out.
I really think it's a little triumph,
and they're funny as well.
[laughs] That's good.
So we've had ducks and we've had swans.
-Mm-hmm.
-Will we get flamingos at some point?
[laughs] Who knows?
-Well done. Thank you.
-Thank you so much.
I'm really happy with how it went.
I feel surprised
that they found it really nice
because I hated the flavour.
For Prue to say that I was an alchemist,
I thought that was a good compliment.
That wasn't very good.
I didn't think I panicked,
but I obviously did. I left the icing out.
[Illiyin] I knew biscuits
were a challenge,
and to fulfil the prophecy
is a bit gutting.
[Andy] Getting them comments,
just fantastic.
It's not like taking a biscuit
round to your mum for a cup of tea.
Sorry. Flipping hell, what's come over me?
I'm just dreading the technical.
I dare say, I'll be awful at that.
Oh, don't. I mean, let's hope
they give us a recipe this time.
[Alison] Jeff didn't feel well enough
to take part in last week's
technical challenge.
He's been to see
the medical team once again.
[Jeff] I'm still feeling a bit funny,
bit lightheaded,
so I'm not feeling 100% myself.
But I'll do the best I can
and work from there.
[all cheering]
-[Jeff] Watch it.
-The star of the day is coming.
-[Jeff] The diva has arrived.
-[all laugh]
You're gonna smash it.
I'm telling you that--
-I'm just gonna watch you.
-Just don't.
[laughs]
[Noel] Neither Jeff
nor any of his fellow bakers
have any idea what biscuits
they'll be asked to make next.
[all chuckle]
Hi, guys,
your technical challenge has been set
by the one and only
Baroness of Biscuits, Prue Leith.
Prue Leith,
have you got any crumbs of wisdom
to sprinkle into the eyes
of our tiny bakers?
In your drawer is a temperature probe.
It's there for a reason.
Well, this challenge is judged blind,
so, Paul and Prue,
pop off to your sleeping bags
and dream of sweet, biscuity dreams.
Okay, our judges would love you
to make a batch of 12 mint cream biscuits.
Ooh.
Your mint cream should consist
of a buttery biscuit
topped with a smooth peppermint cream
and then coated
in a tempered dark chocolate.
Good tempered, not bad tempered.
You have two hours.
On your marks.
Get set.
Bake.
[tense music playing]
[Alison] Everyone has
the same ingredients…
-[Dylan] Okay, okay, okay.
-…and a very basic recipe…
-[sighs]
-…from Prue.
[Dylan] Jokers.
Peppermint cream biscuit.
I know what all of those words mean.
I absolutely detest mint chocolate.
It tastes like toothpaste.
They're great dunked in a coffee.
They melt in your mouth. They're lush.
[birds chirping]
Mint cream biscuits,
my nan had these in the house.
A real treat
if we got a chance to have one.
-They had shiny, green foil. Remember?
-Yeah.
[Prue] There's a shortbread biscuit,
mint cream, then tempered chocolate.
All of that's difficult.
They can overwork the biscuit dough
and then they'll have a tough biscuit
and, of course,
tempering chocolate, that's tricky.
Obviously if it's too thick,
it'll be a right mess.
[Prue] Yes.
It's really important that it's neat.
Because it's a very elegant treat.
They need to get the proportions right.
[Paul] Just the right level
of mint cream to biscuit.
Not too much chocolate.
That's what I remember as a kid.
It's one of those things,
you got the biscuit barrel,
took the lid off, looked inside,
you went "A-ha!"
You see that foil-wrapped biscuit.
"That's the one."
-It didn't last. [laughs]
-No, it didn't.
So the first method,
"Make the biscuit dough."
Lots of detail in that, isn't there?
[Illiyin] It's a shortbread, crumbly.
I'm gonna just use my hands
without overworking the dough, right?
[Hazel] They need a little bit longer.
I feel like the number one criticism
they're gonna have of the biscuits
is that they're overworked.
Last week I came last in technical.
Actually there were only 11 of us
last week, now there are 12.
So I could be 12th. So it could get worse.
-[Christiaan] It stresses me out.
-You had a good signature.
-It doesn't mean anything.
-'Course it does.
But then you go into your technical
and everything could go wrong.
[Alison] Have you ever eaten these before?
-Like an After Eight?
-There's no biscuit there.
-You haven't got a clue, have you?
-No.
[laughs]
"Roll out and chill."
[Dylan] I don't know how thick
they want these.
[Mike] I think they'd want them
beautifully thin.
-[Nelly] Perfect.
-[Noel] So you have a tidy kitchen.
-Tidy kitchen, tidy mind.
-Oh, dirty mind, no.
Kitchen is clean from outside,
inside is all… whoo!
[Noel laughs]
[both] Whoo.
"Number two, make the peppermint cream."
-That's it.
-Okay.
The peppermint cream,
I'm trying to think of the texture.
It's really silky and smooth.
[John] White chocolate and butter,
so it's like a ganache.
A minty ganache, bab.
I don't know what I'm doing.
[Noel] If they're happy
with their cream filling texture,
the bakers need to add
just enough peppermint extract…
I am literally scared to death of this.
…to deliver the classic taste
of a mint cream biscuit.
-Ooh.
-Cor, I can smell from here, that mint.
In the recipe, it's just "to taste".
"To taste", but you know
my taste and they taste is big difference.
[Mike] It has to be
at least quarter of a teaspoon.
I can't measure less than that.
I don't think I've got enough.
In for a penny, in for a pound.
That was enough flavour
without being overpowering.
Trouble is, with peppermint,
starts off and then it goes.
Gonna add a little bit more. Ahh!
[clicks tongue] Disaster.
[tense music playing]
-I don't like this.
-You don't like it?
-Let me try.
-Yeah. Just have a little lick.
-It's delicious.
-You think?
No. Absolutely hate it.
-Are you okay, babe?
-Anything mint chocolate.
So you don't try
because it's not your thing.
Almost gagged.
[Illiyin] I'm gonna use
a five-centimetre round cutter and--
Stamp out 12 rounds
from the biscuit dough.
[Alison] But one baker has
yet to make any dough.
-[Andy] Jeff, you all right?
-Not really.
-What's the matter?
-A bit wobbly.
You lightheaded?
-Yeah. But I mean, I'll try.
-See how you get on.
It just says, "Bake."
[Jeff] I'm not doing great.
I've been talking to him,
but he don't seem to be in a happy place.
I got some tea here. I'll be fine.
-You've nailed it. Look, nailed it.
-No, I don't know yet.
I've never made them before.
I'm left-handed as well.
I'm left-handed.
-Really?
-Yeah.
You know "sinister" means left-handed.
-They used to think…
-They used to kill us.
…you were in league
with the devil. I know.
They had a point, didn't they?
Are you left-handed?
They look anaemic.
So they're definitely gonna need
more than ten minutes.
-I've gone with eight.
-Eight.
-To check it. It'll probably need ten.
-I'll keep an eye.
[John] I reckon 10 to 12.
You'll get a paler shortbread,
which is what you want.
Not saying Prue Leith is wrong
or anything.
-No. Don't you dare.
-[John laughs]
I think I'm gonna start at 13 minutes.
Could be 12, 15. It could be 20.
-It's gonna need more like 20.
-[timer beeps]
Good 20 minutes.
[melancholic guitar music playing]
[Jeff] I've had enough.
I just can't do it.
-Oh.
-Has Jeff gone?
-[Alison] You all right?
-Yeah, I'm done.
-Are you done?
-Yeah.
He's gone, gone? Oh, bless him.
-You tried, man.
-Yeah, that's all.
-All right?
-Yeah.
Want me to come with ya?
-No, I'm fine.
-Sure?
He's been struggling today,
which is sad 'cause he's a great baker.
This time around wasn't right for me.
-Take care.
-All the best.
-[Alison] Look after yourself.
-Yeah. See you later.
I've really enjoyed it.
Everybody's wonderful.
They're a great group of bakers in there.
All right, I didn't make it very far,
but there you go. [laughs]
But it was wonderful,
so thank you very much.
[soft guitar music playing]
[wind rustling]
[birds chirping]
Bakers, you are halfway through
your technical challenge.
I'm scared now.
I've no clue if they're done.
They just don't seem to be browning.
Oh, that's definitely done.
Step six is, "For the chocolate coating,
temper the chocolate."
This bit is the crucial bit,
to temper that chocolate
to get that shine.
-[oven door closes]
-[beeps]
It's a way of heating and bringing down
the temperature of the chocolate
so the cocoa butter crystals
arrange themself in the right structures.
It puts them back together again,
so you get the snap.
It would've been nice to know the
chocolate temperatures. I have no clue.
I can't remember the temperature.
[Christiaan] I'm doing interesting things
with this probe 'cause Prue said so.
Just kind of winging it, so.
I've gotta get up to 42.
[Dylan] One of them's close
to body temperature, so about 37.
-I'm gonna go with that.
-I think it's 32.
-What's it gotta get to?
-Between about 50 and 55, really.
When you do stuff like this,
what are you thinking of?
-I wanna be down the pub.
-[sighs]
-[Noel] Bit of a faff.
-Huge faff.
-Baking, bit of a faff.
-Massive.
It's at 41 degrees.
Now I need to reduce that.
And then bring it back down.
I've done it so often.
Gonna drop it down to 35, 36.
[Gill] You need to get it down to 36.
If you actually put cold chocolate in,
it should help do that.
-[Hazel] That's tempered all over now.
-That's amazing.
If you touch it, it should be hard
and not leave a fingerprint.
My chocolate has tempered.
It's just not tempered.
It has a little bit of a sheen on it.
It's nice.
Nah, that's not tempered.
If at first you don't succeed, try again,
my gran used to tell me.
-And that's it really. Oh, my God.
-Brilliant.
Can I… Can I hug you?
[laughs] No, buh-bye.
[laughter]
[Nelly] Come on, I love you!
They're so naughty.
You have 15 minutes left.
[groans] Ah!
So many numbers. Like, 32, 35, 29, 28, 33.
This is the archives of a madman.
"Dip the base of the cooled biscuit
in the tempered chocolate."
I don't care,
I'm just gonna start putting biscuits in.
"And place chocolate side up
on a baking sheet."
[Andy] Chocolate si… Oh, you melt.
"Place a disc of peppermint cream
in centre of each biscuit,
then coat in tempered chocolate."
[Hazel] I dunno how to put it on.
Spoon it on?
[Andy] Chocolate side up. Wallop.
[Hazel] Oh, this isn't as easy
as I thought it was going to be.
What I've learnt about this tent
is everyone can have a good day or not
regardless of how good a baker you are.
I am trying to coat them
without making it too thick.
[Dylan] In my head,
this worked much better.
If you could eliminate one person?
Right now, I'm gonna eliminate you.
If you could…
Oh, no!
[tense music playing]
Oh, no, no!
I've left my bloody pan of water on there.
I've took it past its temper point,
so now you've gotta start again.
It ain't gonna cool in time.
You have five minutes left.
-[Andy] Oh, you--
-Whoo. [sighs]
[Illiyin] My hands are shaking now.
Oh, this poxy thing.
-Breathe.
-[Andy] Cheers, babe.
You're gonna be fine.
I'm just tempering more.
I didn't have enough. Come on, come on…
It's absolute carnage.
It's a tight one.
Dunno if I've got enough chocolate.
Bakers, you've got one minute left.
This has turned horrible.
[Alison] One minute.
[Nelly] This says,
"Decorate with milk chocolate."
So let's get artistic.
I'm sorry to the carpet.
[Illiyin] There's nowhere to hide
in this one.
[tense music playing]
[sighs heavily]
[Dylan] Done.
Bakers, your time is up.
[exhales] Oh, my God.
Please bring your mint cream biscuits
and place them behind your photograph.
Mine look awful, though.
They're really bad.
-[Andy groans]
-[Gill] Everybody cuddle Andy.
[Georgie] Listen, after what
-got them on the plate.
-[Andy] Cheers.
[Noel] Prue and Paul are expecting
crumbly shortbread,
silky peppermint cream,
and an elegant, shiny
tempered chocolate finish.
And they'll have no idea whose is whose.
-[Paul] Start over here?
-[Prue] Looks nicely tempered chocolate.
It's got a great shine. This spinning
chocolate looks good. Quite neat.
-[Prue] Delicious.
-It tastes good.
-That's lovely, thin chocolate, isn't it?
-Mmm.
-Biscuit's really tender.
-Love the mint flavour.
-[Prue] Yum.
-Good start.
-Moving on.
-[Prue] The chocolate looks dull.
[Paul] Yeah, very dull.
[Prue] It's either not been tempered
or it didn't work.
[Paul] Yeah.
Although they are pretty neat.
-They taste good though.
-[Prue] Mmm.
[Paul] Moving on to three.
This is a disaster.
The chocolate was too thick
and cooling too much when it went on.
-Ah. I've got it. Got it.
-[laughter]
Wow. That's about
half-inch tempered chocolate.
If you was nine, that'd be the dream.
-It is smooth.
-[Paul] Yeah, but look at it.
[Prue] I know.
[Paul] There's some shine to this.
[Prue] Mmm.
That is really good shortbread.
Melt-in-the-mouth. It's tender.
[Paul] These look neat.
There's a lot of mint.
The flavour's nice.
The blend together, the chocolate,
the mint, the biscuit, is good.
I like the proportions of this.
-The mint to the base.
-[Prue] Yeah.
-The mint bit is a bit grainy.
-Mmm, it is.
The biscuit's a bit tough.
Moving on. Not much shine on these.
They're a bit of a mess.
[Prue] Spinning not very good.
They've been manhandled,
which is why it's lost its shine as well.
Nice, thin coating of chocolate.
-[Paul] A lot of mint going on.
-Mmm.
[Paul] Not much shine on these.
[Prue] I like that mint, though.
[Paul] The flavour's okay,
the look I don't like.
Bit clumsy on the spinning
of the chocolate. It's too thick.
-They're nice, them.
-[Prue] Really nice looking.
[Paul] Thin, bit of a shine to it,
all the same size.
The proportions look good.
-I love the textures of those.
-[Paul] The textures are nice.
That's a bit messy.
They look like top hats.
[chuckles]
I like the flavour of that.
All the textures are good.
-It just looks a mess.
-[Prue] It's a pity.
[imperceptible]
[Paul] Moving on to this… disaster.
[Prue] Looks like
it was assembled in a hurry.
Just a bit.
-[Prue laughs]
-Ah, got one.
-Crumbly biscuit on that one.
-And very smooth mint cream.
[Paul] Mmm. Bit of a mess, that one.
[Alison] Prue and Paul will now
rank the mint cream biscuits.
In eleventh place, we have this one.
That's me.
Dylan, looks a mess, doesn't it?
In tenth spot, we have this one. Andy.
[Prue and Paul laugh]
[Noel] Georgie is ninth, Illiyin eighth,
Nelly seventh, Christiaan sixth,
Hazel is fifth, and Gill is fourth.
And in third spot, we have this one.
Sumayah. It's neatly done
and tastes great.
And in second place, we have…
these. John, these are pretty good.
Very neat, good shine on 'em,
just weren't as good as first.
And that means that this is the winner.
-Mike.
-[all clap and cheer]
John and yours were so close,
took a while to agree.
But honestly, this is really good.
I'm absolutely gobsmacked.
You're right,
I think we should change them round.
[all laugh]
I mean, I really, really love
mint chocolate now.
[Dylan] I never imagined
putting something up that bad.
But I did.
Yeah, it's kicked me right in the guts.
-No hiding tomorrow.
-Yeah, it's gotta go off without a hitch.
I'm not safe at all.
[birds chirping]
[Alison] One challenge remains
before we discover
who will be Biscuit Week's Star Baker
and who will be leaving the tent.
Let's do this, Gill.
-Good luck.
[Noel] So we lost Jeff again.
It's a lot of pressure in the tent
if you're not 100%.
The Brooklyn energy will be missed,
know what I mean?
I liked him. We wish him well.
Let's talk about the competition, though.
[Paul] Sumayah's done well.
She's a front-runner for Star Baker.
[Prue] The one to watch is John.
[Paul] Hazel's in trouble.
Georgie's down there as well.
-[Prue] Illiyin.
-[Paul] Illiyin's not doing well.
-She got a handshake.
-[Alison] Exactly.
[Prue] It happens, but this year, more so.
It's this business of people
doing amazingly well and very badly.
The ping-pong brigade.
[Prue] Look at Dylan.
He's sitting up at the top
and last in technical.
-[Paul] Andy as well.
-[Noel] This is a true story.
I saw him go, "Hello, mate", to a spoon.
[all laugh]
I was going, are the spoons your friends?
What's happening?
[Alison] Welcome back, bakers.
For your showstopper,
Paul and Prue would love you to create
an edible puppet theatre.
It's the perfect challenge for anyone
who's ever been watching The Muppet Show
and thought they'd like
to eat Kermit the Frog.
[laughs]
Your theatre should consist
of a biscuit scene
complete with edible puppets.
-You have four hours.
-On your marks.
-Get set.
-Bake.
[bright classical music playing]
A whole puppet show.
Construction, that's where the issues are.
I've performed on stage loads of times
and I've built a real stage,
but not a biscuit one.
The Muppets, the Fraggles.
Back in the '70s, '80s,
that was your entertainment.
As a child, my favourite puppet
was Andy Pandy. [laughs]
There's a lot of engineering in this,
so what I would use
is more of a robust biscuit
like a gingerbread.
Ah, that smells good.
You also need a good glue.
People might use royal icing
or melted chocolate,
but I would recommend caramel.
I used to paint theatre scenes
when I was in art college.
It's all about flair.
When you sit down,
your senses are hit by all the colours.
I expect that in a biscuit form.
-[birds chirping]
-[Paul] Hi, Andy.
So, we need to know
all about your showstopper.
My showstopper is a day in the life
of me at my work.
Once, I was on route to a breakdown,
confronted with a lot of traffic.
All of a sudden,
this pig dives out the back of this van.
[snorts] Like pig.
It was on its trotters up the A12.
[laughs]
-He thought, "I'm making a run for it!"
-Prison break.
Bang. Yeah.
Are you calling it "Porkshank Redemption"?
I missed a trick.
Who's voicing the pig? Morgan Freeman?
-Yeah.
[Alison] Andy's escaped puppet pig
will be made from a lemon iced
Shrewsbury biscuit
and will bid for freedom
across a gingerbread stage
that tells yet another story.
-What flavours you going for?
-[Andy] Ginger, but I hit it with sumac.
Years ago, we're on a family holiday
to Tel Aviv--
-Let me get us a chair.
-I dragged them boys-- Well, you did ask.
-[laughs]
-Yeah, I know, but--
We've moved from that
to a holiday you went to?
[Andy] So it's got sumac.
Lovely Middle Eastern flavours.
Some nice brandy snap curtains
and Shrewsbury biscuits.
Good luck, Andy. Sounds amazing.
-Thank you.
-Thank you, sir.
-[Noel] Absolutely out of his mind.
-[Prue] He's mad.
[Noel] Andy isn't the only
storytelling mechanic in the tent.
I'm gonna have a moving background.
There's gonna be four scenes.
It's loosely based on myself.
It's about a biscuit boy
who doesn't fit in.
One night, he decides, together
with his teddy bear, to go on the move.
Next morning, they wake up,
there's a big white tent.
-Funny that.
-I know. [laughs]
Inside, it's like this biscuit wonderland,
and he fits right in.
[Alison] A biscuit young Christiaan
will tread coconut macaroon boards
past bittercookie stars
in an ambitious
Dutch speculaas mechanical theatre,
complete with grapefruit
and saffron spritz curtains.
[Christiaan] I made it
for my nieces and nephews
because it's based about
that it's okay to be yourself.
Incredible. So have you got a timing plan?
-Yes, I do actually.
-You do.
[Noel] Look at that.
You need 167 hours
to get this done. [laughs]
Isn't that what we've got? [laughs]
[Alison] With less than four hours
to win over the toughest of critics…
It's time to behave. Become serious.
[Noel] …the showstopping puppet theatres
will require
multiple batches of multiple biscuits.
That's a side…
No, that's the back. Wait, what?
[Gill] It's cutting, chilling,
baking, cooling.
Lots and lots of times.
-[Alison] Is four hours enough?
-[Hazel] No.
-Four days'd be okay.
-We ain't got four days, babe.
Don't worry about it.
It's just Paul Hollywood.
It's only Paul and Prue.
[Noel] He's not even real.
He's a figment of everyone's imagination.
He's like the logo for baking.
Doesn't really exist.
[Alison] But as well as the judges,
Georgie is also seeking critical acclaim
from an entire country.
My puppet theatre is based on
a Welsh festival that is held every year.
[Noel] Georgie's place in the competition
could rest on a gingerbread theatre
decorated with leeks and daffodils
featuring spotlights shining on
chocolate and date folk dancers.
[Georgie] So I'm really hoping to do
Wales proud on this one.
I'm getting emotional about it,
I don't know why.
It's just, yeah.
I'm missing the kids and like,
this is something they do.
It means a lot to everyone in Wales.
[John] My family have had a holiday home
on the Mid Wales coast for 40-plus years.
It's my happy place.
Me and my dog Stanley
go on lovely long walks.
[Noel] John hopes
to retain the Star Baker crown
by recreating his favourite walk
with an orange and cinnamon Stanley
in a honey and chilli gingerbread theatre.
Don't you love going out on a good walk?
[John] Put my earphones,
listen to Beyoncé.
Live life that way.
-Wish you had your headphones?
-Yes.
-I'd zone out, pretend nobody's here.
-Would you like to?
If you want, I'll remove them.
Guys, can you get out?
[laughs]
[Noel] Baking gingerbread to build with
requires perfect timing.
Little bit more
because that piece is gonna support
the weight of the entire stage.
[Alison] Not baked for long enough,
the puppet theatres could collapse.
[Nelly] This has to be slightly overbaked.
It's a structure, has to be strong.
Maybe the judge'll complain,
but you can't do miracles, can you?
[Alison] But too long
and it will be too tough to eat.
[Mike] Are there gingerbread gods?
Can I pray to them? [laughs]
-I'm a freelance gingerbread god.
-[laughs]
You can summon me.
But one baker won't be building
with gingerbread.
[Paul] Shortbread's quite
an unusual choice
based on the fact
it'll be quite a structural…
I find it okay.
[Noel] Orange and chocolate shortbread
will form Hazel's traditional
Punch and Judy show,
pitched on a cherry and almond
shortbread beach.
We used to take our children
down to Margate to watch it.
-[high-pitched] That's the way to do it.
-That's right.
[in normal voice] Who's Mr Punch based on?
'Cause it's Punch and Prudie.
Paul's the crocodile.
[laughter]
[Alison] Dylan's inspiration hails
from a little further away than Margate.
[Dylan] I'm doing it based off
a Japanese fable my dad used to tell me.
The moon goddess came down to Earth
in the form of a beggar
and asked these three animals for food.
The rabbit couldn't get anything,
so instead it threw itself on the fire.
The moon goddess was like,
"You're so nice",
and took the rabbit up to the moon.
[Alison] Hoping to shine
after a disastrous technical challenge,
Dylan will hang his moon
alongside Hokusai-inspired macarons
filled with yuzu,
and mint and whisky and miso caramel.
And his sugar biscuit puppet cast
made with roasted soya bean flour
could be getting a new member.
Who's this little guy? Look.
[Dylan] What's that?
Don't know. Who is that guy?
Are you good at tempering chocolate?
[Alison] The cast of Gill's production
should be familiar to almost everyone.
"Run, run, as fast as you can.
You can't catch me,
I'm the gingerbread man."
As a child, I went through more than
a dozen copies of that Ladybird book.
[Noel] Gill will present
her favourite childhood story
on a rotating stage with a supporting cast
made from vanilla biscuits.
I'm sure it'll come as a shock to you,
but I have no idea what the story is.
It's a little old lady and man.
They don't have children,
so they bake a gingerbread man
who comes to life and then he runs away.
He comes to a river, and the fox says
"I'll carry you across",
and as he's carrying him,
he basically eats the gingerbread man
so it's not a happy ending.
They were weird stories, weren't they?
Definitely, yeah.
This is why we are how we are.
-This is why we…
-[laughs]
[Noel] The fox would not be welcome
at Mike's showstopper.
My puppets are all of the different
livestock that we have on the farm.
This chicken, we've got a video of her
rounding up goats.
She's a sheep chicken.
-[Alison laughs] Sheep chicken?
-[Mike laughs]
[Alison] Mike will control his herd
using biscotti and puppet strings
and his theatre will have
an authentic dramatic touch.
My dramatic society
have beautiful red curtains,
so I'm doing red curtains
with the Florentines.
[Christiaan] These are
the spritz biscuits.
Hopefully, they're ruffled
like actual theatre curtains.
[Noel] But it could be curtains…
[Dylan] Oh, my God.
…for Dylan's Japanese fable.
When I was took it out, it slipped off.
Pretty annoying.
[Noel] He'll have to remake
the front of his theatre.
And that's not all.
Oh, those are burnt.
They're all burnt as well.
These are front and centre. My characters.
So I don't want them burnt.
The main thing I'm worried about is time.
It's a bit terrifying.
[birds chirping]
Bakers, you are now halfway through.
[Dylan] That's not good.
I need to move fast.
[Alison] Whilst Dylan's
understudies hit the oven…
I shouldn't spend time on this.
…most of the bakers are ready
for a dress rehearsal.
I'm just going to put some clothes
on Punch and Judy.
But I'm not very artistic.
[John] So I'm just trying
to decorate Stanley, my dog.
[Illiyin] I've got myself, my husband
and some strawberries.
Before me and my husband had kids,
we went strawberry picking on a date.
Those don't happen any more.
This is the closest I'm gonna get
to a date with my husband.
[Noel] Illiyin's date
with her husband Umar
will be recreated
in strawberry shortbread,
a rooibos-orange sugar biscuit
and chocolate soil.
I met my husband in Spain.
-He was 11, and I was 10.
-Yeah.
And when we were 18 and 19, he told me,
"I've known since I was 15
I was gonna marry you."
-Stop it.
-"So what are you saying?"
I was like, "I'm not gonna marry you."
Did you not wanna do something romantic
and go, "I knew, too."
No 'cause I definitely didn't know.
-But it'll be ten years in August.
-[Alison] I love that.
[Noel] Illiyin's showstopper will be
part of a romantic double bill.
[Nelly] I'm doing a forest.
It present my life before.
And then you meet your Prince Charming,
which was my husband,
and he guide me in the light
and make me happy.
And then there gonna be my children.
This is very emotional for me.
I wanna cry.
[Alison] As they walk towards the light,
Nelly's family will be silhouetted
against a lemon-iced forest backdrop.
And five stained glass biscuits
will complete a very personal tribute.
So, these stars present
my five unborn children.
This was twins.
Yeah. And they belong there.
Yeah. Even if you don't born them,
you carry them in you.
All your life. You've got the genes in.
So I can't miss them on my show, can I?
You know, you're going in your life
through so many obstacles
and a forest present
all these horrible obstacle
which we have to do in our lives.
And it's dark and it's painful,
but in every tunnel,
in every forest, is a light.
Maybe small. Teeny-weeny.
But you'll get them
and then it's gonna be big one.
So they're gonna hang.
Then they'll be above us like they are.
'Cause they are.
Yeah.
[gentle music playing]
[crow cawing]
Bakers, you only have one hour left.
Oh, my God.
The bittercookies are coming out.
I might leave the macaroons a bit longer.
There is just so much to do.
[Noel] Whilst producing
countless fillings and biscuits…
I need to breathe into a bag, I think.
…is putting Christiaan and Dylan behind…
I don't know what I'm doing.
I'm kind of on autopilot.
…there are still
huge theatre backdrops to create.
[Nelly] We just gotta be creative now.
Let's go in the zone. [exhales]
[Sumayah] I'm just using some
gel food colour and a bit of water.
It's like an Impressionist painting.
[Noel] Sumayah's Impressionist backdrop
will be framed by even more swans
at the centre of her lemon
and poppyseed moving theatre,
where cardamom and cinnamon wheels
will transport her leading lady
to a fairytale world.
[Sumayah] She's having a fondant dress.
[Alison] Everything you do is intricate.
Who taught you this?
-I just practised it myself.
-Really? This is gonna be so beautiful.
[Dylan] So now I'm doing the painting.
I'm moving quick 'cause I know
I need to build a theatre. [laughs]
[Noel] But building a biscuit theatre…
Set is alive and well
with the baked bean tins.
[Alison] …can't really be rushed.
[Noel] This is a weird thing to do, innit?
A bit bizarre, isn't it?
Do you need me to put all the clocks back?
Yes. Especially Paul and Prue's.
[Hazel] I'm using white chocolate.
I'm using caramel
because it solidifies really quickly.
Ideally, I would like
to put these in the fridge.
But I can't get
this lump of wood in there.
Oh!
I'll have to hold them.
[Mike] Everyone step really lightly.
[Nelly] Don't breathe.
Don't breathe. [gasps]
I says don't breathe!
It's too thin. It's not gonna work.
[gasps] Ah!
[Illiyin] Oh, it snapped.
[Alison] Bakers,
you've got half an hour left.
-[blows raspberry]
-This is tense.
-[Noel] So tense.
-[Nelly gasps]
That falling like that
just didn't do me no favours,
so I've just gotta patch it up.
[Nelly] The chocolate isn't setting,
so I need to try my back-up plan.
That's better.
[Sumayah] I need to assemble the wheels.
They're gonna rotate, hopefully.
[Georgie] My caramel just crystallised,
so I'm behind time.
[Hazel] Getting the roof on.
Oh, no.
It's just a nightmare.
[Andy] Gonna spoon it on.
He likes caramel, doesn't he? Paul?
He gets jet-washed with caramel every day.
Just his blue eyes shining through
that deep orangey-brown colour.
[exhales] Let's get it together.
I'm going full-on now on construction.
I think I can get it up in ten.
That leaves me time
to paint my macarons.
Thank God it moves.
I feel like I'm in IKEA.
It's slotting together.
-I did Airfix as a child. Is it showing?
-[Noel] I think so.
[Illiyin] I've had issues
with sticking the sides.
So I'm gonna trim the top off.
Paul will be like, "That's a mess."
[Hazel] This is a joke.
Let me get the icing on and cover it.
[Christiaan] Decorating the floor parts.
You've done all this and you're here?
-Yeah.
-Nearly there.
-Stressing me out.
-Where's where we go to the pub?
This white bit at the end.
-That bit?
-Yeah.
[birds chirping]
Bakers, you have ten minutes remaining.
Oh, okay.
Most nerve-wracking bit is done.
I just stick the front piece on,
then just add the embellishments.
I'm putting lights in the back,
but little fiddly bits take up your time.
[Christiaan] This dowl is going
in the cookie,
so it can be used as a puppet.
Yay. [laughs]
[Dylan] I'm painting my macarons.
It's inspired by the Great Wave
by Hokusai.
Famous painting.
[Christiaan] I'm doing a bit of
Vincent Van Gogh-inspired decoration.
So let's hope that that resonates.
I'm just so annoyed
I didn't put it in the fridge.
It's collapsing.
I think I could've baked it a bit longer.
Yeah, you can see it's underbaked there.
[Hazel] Never in a million years
am I gonna finish.
-[Sumayah] Need help?
-I'm giving up.
Don't give up.
Your royal icing's runny. Use mine.
Oh. It's got a big crack in it.
Right in the middle where it's weakest.
I can stick it together with caramel.
Bakers, you've got five minutes left.
-Ah.
-You cut it and I'll stick it up.
-How many stripes are you doing? Four?
-Yes.
[Andy] We'll have Paul's motor.
Got lots that's not done,
but I'm just gonna put black on these.
-[exhales] This is ugly.
-[Hazel] This is taking me out this week.
[Sumayah] I'm not gonna touch that bit
any more in case it breaks.
[Hazel] At least they're on. Thank you.
You only have one minute left.
[dramatic music playing]
[Christiaan] It is like
how I practised it.
Those people are absolutely horrendous.
I'd rather they not see them.
Sorry, husband.
[Hazel] This is the baby.
But I had plans to do sausages on here.
Just rubbish.
Bakers, your time is up.
[Illiyin blows raspberry]
Oh, my God.
You did fantastic. Lovely.
Christ, look at that.
[Illiyin] I just feel a bit dizzy.
[producer] Can we get a medic
to Illiyin, please?
[John] We got a medic?
-[Georgie] Oh, no.
-[man] Get a medic.
[medic] She needs some privacy.
-Can you hear me?
-[Illiyin] Feel dizzy.
[medic] Give yourself a minute.
[Georgie] I hope she's okay.
[thunder rumbling]
Handshake first episode,
fainting the second. [chuckles]
[Alison] After fainting,
Illiyin is still recovering
with the medical team.
[Noel] Okay, bakers, unfortunately,
Illiyin's still feeling a little woozy.
But we will be judging her showstopper.
Gill, it's time
for your biscuit showstopper.
[tense music playing]
You start in the kitchen,
then he runs past the cow
and to the river,
where unfortunately,
it gets eaten by the fox.
[Paul] The design is exceptional.
[Prue] You've been so clever
to just use piping
because you're good at it.
[Paul] It's neat as a pin.
Tell us about the biscuit.
It's just a traditional gingerbread.
-That is perfectly baked.
-Thank you.
The characters are made
out of a vanilla biscuit.
That's a bit tougher. Good flavour though.
Thank you.
[gentle music playing]
The puppets are animals from our farm
and you can make them dance.
[Prue] Oh.
-[Paul] Clever.
-[Prue] Taste lovely.
The sweetness comes through
that ginger really nicely.
Good ginger.
[Mike] The curtains are Florentine.
It's a bit chewy, that.
The flavour's all right, though.
[gentle music playing]
The story is you're in the van,
pig runs out a van down the A12.
This side looks as if you dropped it.
The cracking's to represent
an old theatre.
[Paul] It's awkward,
but all the elements are there.
So I've got a ginger nut
and sumac theatre.
The sumac should give you that citrus,
but a little heat as well.
It does give you the citrus.
-Yeah.
-Which I quite like.
-And I love the Shrewsbury biscuit.
-Well done, Andy.
-Cheers.
-[Prue] Excellent.
[whimsical music playing]
-Collapsed at the front.
-[Georgie] Yeah.
[Paul] That comes down
to the bakes. It's soft.
I love the little daffodils.
Where is the leeks?
There's a few pieces missing.
The Welsh dancers are a cinnamon,
date and chocolate biscuit.
-Mmm. The dates come through.
-Mmm.
-But they're underbaked.
-Okay.
Let me try this. This is a ginger.
That is really delicious.
It's all slightly underbaked,
but the flavours are spot on on all of it.
[gentle music playing]
This is Johnny and Stanley's
Welsh Adventure.
You could've gone into a little bit
more detail on the figures.
The puppets and the trees at the front
are an orange and cinnamon.
-That orange comes through lovely.
-[Prue] But quite tough.
The main theatre is
a honey and chilli gingerbread.
That's beautiful.
It's tenderer and crunchier.
[Paul] The chilli level is perfect.
[gentle music playing]
[Paul] You're very artistic.
The colours on the backdrop are beautiful.
And it's a mobile theatre.
That's just amazing.
-[laughs]
-[Paul] And the flavours?
Cardamom and cinnamon
and a lemon and poppyseed.
-That is delicious.
-The lemon…
That's not the lemon.
-[Paul] Cardamom?
-Yeah.
-Where's the lemon coming from?
-No lemon. [laughs]
-That's definitely lemony.
-Yeah.
Tastes amazing.
And you do get the cardamom.
[laughs] I'll take it. I dunno what I did.
The cardamom works beautifully.
Okay. [laughs]
-[Paul] The bit with the lemon's the back.
-[Sumayah] Yeah.
-[Paul] It's a bit too thick.
-Mmm.
Having said that, your design
and your artistry on that is fantastic.
[Prue] They are exquisite, those swans.
-Thank you.
-[Paul] Well done.
[gentle classical music playing]
[Nelly] It is about my relation
with my husband.
We went through a lot of obstacles,
but on the end of the forest is the light.
We have two beautiful children
and there are five stars
which represent our babies
which are no more with us.
So beautiful.
There's a real thought there,
a depth to it as well.
[Prue] Wonderful colours.
-[Paul] I wanna try the shortbread.
-[Prue] Mmm.
Nice and tender.
[Paul] It melts in the mouth beautifully.
And the background here?
Is a gingerbread.
In the icing, I used lemon.
It's got a nice flavour
and I love the sharpness
-from the citrus.
-Lemon.
[Paul] I think the whole design
is exceptional.
Ooh! Ooh!
Sorry.
Okay, bakers, for all intents
and purposes, I am Illiyin.
-[laughing]
-[Mike] You look fabulous.
I know. [laughs]
[grunts]
Okay.
-Oh, this… [laughs]
-[laughter]
-This is horrible.
-[all laughing]
I've had nightmares about this. [chuckles]
[gentle music playing]
The design idea's good,
but it's missing the integral part,
which is Illiyin and her husband.
There's no puppet element.
We have an orange sugar biscuit.
It's got a citrus tang to it.
Good flavour. Got a nice snap to it.
[Paul] Let's try the strawberry.
-It's also very soft.
-[Paul] Very soft.
-Underbaked.
-[Paul] Thank you.
Thank you.
-[thud]
-[gasps]
-[Prue] Are you all right?
-I went to grab my water bottle.
[all laughing]
[Paul] What's going on?
-[Noel] You all right?
-[laughs] No, I'm good.
We're dropping like bloody files.
It ain't one of them murder mysteries,
is it? [chuckles] Who done it?
[Mike] It was the rolling pin in the tent.
-[Andy] Yeah.
-[laughing]
Oh, my God. [laughing]
Hazel, please bring up your showstopper.
[gentle music playing]
[Paul] It's charming.
You can see what it is straight away,
but it's a bit wonky.
-It's old.
-So am I.
-[all laughing]
-You're old and wonky too?
-I'm a little bit wonky.
-[all laughing]
I'm a little disappointed
that Punch doesn't look like Punch.
-I wanted him to have a big truncheon.
-[Paul] This is Judy.
That's cherry and almond.
It's a little bit underbaked,
those little ones.
-And this other biscuit is?
-Chocolate chip and orange.
That's a very nice biscuit.
But I think you needed
a lot more time on that.
-About another day.
-[Paul] I'd say about that.
[laughing]
[dramatic music playing]
This is the moon god
who came down to Earth as a beggar.
And then the rabbit threw itself
in the fire and sacrificed himself.
-Then it went on the moon.
-[Paul laughs]
-Oh, how clever.
-It's so good.
-[Prue] I love the Hokusai painting.
-Thank you.
A little accident here.
The weight caused it
to cave in in the middle.
[Paul] So these biscuits are?
-Roasted soya bean flour.
-Very interesting flavour.
-I like that.
-Beautifully painted.
And then there's the two giant macarons.
[Prue] The filling?
[Dylan] Caramel with whisky,
and then it has a bit of miso.
Can't get the miso. You get the whiskey.
That's quite tasty.
[Dylan] That's the yuzu curd with mint.
-Oh, yeah.
-You are so good at flavour.
And a great designer of story.
Well done, Dylan.
-Thank you.
-Thanks.
[dramatic music playing]
We've got a little biscuit boy
who doesn't quite fit in
into the world where he lives.
So he decides together with his teddy
to go on a little journey.
They travel through the night
to then find themselves
in this beautiful flower meadow
where there is like a big white tent.
And inside,
they find this biscuit wonderland
where they fit right in.
-[Alison] Aw.
-[Paul laughs]
I think it's utterly charming.
It's really detailed.
I don't know how you managed
to do it in the time.
I've never seen anything like that
in the tent. Very professionally done.
-Wonderful.
-The main structure's a speculaas biscuit.
The spice level in that is perfect,
and it snaps, there's a crunch to it.
Delicious.
[Paul] This is the…
Spritz curtains, which are flavoured
with saffron and grapefruit.
-Wow. Saffron is instant, isn't it?
-[Prue] Mmm.
I have to come over to you.
[all cheering]
Honestly.
[Prue] Absolutely.
That's one of the best things
I've ever seen in the tent. Ever.
[Noel laughing]
-[Prue] Wonderful.
-[Paul] Well done.
-[Christiaan] Thanks.
-[Alison] Well done.
[all cheering]
[Christiaan] I did not see that coming.
These moments that you wanna
really be, like, in the moment,
but I wasn't,
because I was completely gobsmacked.
That's absolutely insane.
I think it went okay.
They really liked my design,
so I'm happy with that.
I think I'm definitely in the bottom three
and I think I could go home.
[Hazel] I'm expecting them
to send me home.
I'd be more surprised if I'm in.
[thunder rumbling]
[Noel] It's decision time
for Paul and Prue.
Guys, it's been an eventful
couple of days.
Jeff left the tent again. Illiyin fainted.
Dylan fell off his stool.
Think he'd been at the saké. [laughs]
-We've also had some amazing bakes.
-Yeah.
-Christiaan, that was special.
-[Prue] Christiaan was fantastic.
That is one of the best bakes
I've seen in the tent for 15 years.
Somebody else did well. There's Sumayah.
She's so delicate and exquisite
with everything she does.
Yeah. There's some people
we need to talk about.
Georgie lacked slightly in her showstopper
and she was ninth in the technical.
Illiyin's showstopper tasted pretty good.
Problem was it was slightly underbaked.
It was about her and her husband,
neither of whom featured.
Hazel's showstopper,
the Punch and Judy characters
were a little bit basic.
-Tasty?
-It was. The chocolate chip was delicious.
You did say to Hazel, "I wanted Mr Punch
to have a big truncheon."
-[all laughing]
-Well, I did!
What's the matter with that?
Well, bakers, luckily,
I've got the great job of announcing
this week's Star Baker.
And the Star Baker is…
-Sumayah.
-[all applauding]
-Well done.
You so deserve it.
[softly] What the hell?
Now, unfortunately,
I've got the real sad news.
So the baker who's leaving
the tent today is…
Hazel.
-I knew it would be. I knew it would be.
-I'm so sorry.
-I am sorry, Hazel.
-That's okay. That's okay.
I did expect it.
All my bakes have gone wrong.
-[Hazel] Never mind.
-[Alison] Oh, I'm so sorry.
Maybe I won't bake puppet theatres
any more. [laughs]
-I'm gonna really miss you.
-[kisses]
This really brought it home very hard now
that that is going to keep happening,
-someone will go.
-[Gill] Don't tell me Mike's crying.
-Mike always cries.
-[Hazel] Oh, he always cries.
-[all laughing]
-They cry, it's making me cry.
-[Prue] Well done, Sumayah.
-[Sumayah] Thank you so much.
Thank you.
I literally cannot believe
I got Star Baker.
I was like, "What?"
It was a total surprise. I'm so happy.
One million percent,
I thought it'd be Christiaan.
-You did so well this week.
-Thanks.
I've got a showstopper handshake
in the bag and I cannot believe it.
I'm, like, blown away. [laughs]
I'll have a gin and tonic,
catch up on the snooker, and then just
try and get my head round bread.
So I'm looking forward to bread week.
To charm Mr Paul Hollywood.
Charm him with my buns.
[closing theme music playing]